
We start our more detailed analysis with Fed hiking cycles. The asset with the clearest link to Fed policy is the front end of the US rates curve, where the hikes have to be priced. For this analysis, we use two-year bonds as a benchmark. The typical hiking cycle is well telegraphed. The Fed does not wake up one day and hike in a panic. The reason is that the Fed is targeting core inflation. Although headline inflation can move rapidly, often in response to oil price spikes, core inflation tends to move more slowly. In addition, the Fed often ignores the initial price impact of exogenous shocks and instead focuses on slower-moving changes in wage-setting behavior and/or in the formation of inflation expectations. This is different from easing cycles, where panic cuts can and do happen, usually in response to severe equity market weakness. Figure 5.5 shows how total returns of the two year note behave into the first Fed hike of the cycle. We have used our algorithm to determine first hikes and focus on cycles post 1986. Our dates are similar to qualitative analysis of cycles, for example, by Blinder (2023) where the authors’ reliance on drifts in the effective fund rate dates some cycles a few months earlier. As can be seen in Figure 5.5, returns over three months are poor going into the first hike, starting around 75 to 55 trading days (around 3 months) before the first hike. Returns remain subdued once the hiking cycle begins, especially relative to the unconditional positive average (rates have fallen, on average, since the late 1970s). But returns after the first hike are initially not disastrous, largely because they have been priced going into it. Markets eventually trade poorly again as the hiking cycles progress. FIGURE 5.5 T﻿wo-year bond returns poor into and out of first hike. Source: Bloomberg and authors’ calculations. Payers typically continue to work until the hiking cycle is quite mature. In fact, the trading patterns around the last hike of the cycle are even clearer than around the first hike.We show this in Figure 5.6. It turns out that the excess returns of the two year rates trough around the time of the last hike. For the 10th percentile (the lowest line shaded), two year bond returns bottom a bit more than a month (30 trading days) ahead of the last hike, which is roughly around the penultimate hike. 2s then rally strongly after the last hike. FIGURE 5.6 Two-year bond returns turn positive only after last hike. Source: Bloomberg and authors’ calculations. What about the period between the first and last hike? The answer is that investors should just remain paid while hiking cycles continue. One question is whether pauses or a step down in the size of the hikes matter and can be traded. Figure 5.7a shows returns for two year US rates around events where the Fed is becoming more dovish in a hiking cycle, but where the cycle is not over yet. The events are Fed pauses that occur in a manner different from the prevailing rhythm of the hiking cycle under investigation. We find that pauses in an ongoing hiking cycle are not as helpful as we would have thought. Returns go mostly sideways into the pause and out of it. Figure 5.7b shows the two step-downs in the size of the hikes in 2022 and 2023, which came toward the end of the hiking cycle. The two step-downs in late 2022 and early 2023 (note they overlap on chart given their proximity) led to the market trading well into it, but then poorly out of it, with bonds trading poorly and two year yields making new highs after the two step-downs. We conclude that when step-downs or pauses in hiking cycles are expected, payers will probably not generate much positive PNL, but it is not clear that trading around such events can add much alpha either. Given the inherent uncertainties, it may be best to remain paid. Of course, positioning for these regularities is easier said than done. It would be good to know when the Fed is likely to start hiking rates, given that the market is pricing it a few months earlier. Furthermore, paying rates in expectation of a first hike is typically negative carry, because after the end of the preceding easing cycle, the market almost always prices at least some chance of a hike quite quickly. Clearly, a heads-up would be useful. The same is true for the last hike, even though the market appears less forward-looking on that side of the ledger. To get at least a rough idea of where the Fed stands, we can either employ Taylor rule models a la Taylor (1993), or we can listen to the Fed, or both. The Taylor rule is based on the dual mandate of the Fed, as it is tasked by Congress to generate stable prices and maximum employment. The Fed has operationalized the inflation target by aiming for 2% over the longer run, measured by the core personal consumption expenditure price index (PCE). The core concept strips out volatile food and energy prices. The original rule used the GDP deflator, but Fed Chair Bernanke subsequently proposed a modification, using different coefficients and focusing on the PCE see Bernanke (2015). In an irony of historic proportions, the Fed actually tweaked its inflation targeting framework in August of 2020 to aim for average inflation targeting, meaning that following periods where inflation had been below 2% (as was the case going into August 2020), the Fed would allow inflation to run moderately above 2% for some time. As is often typical in wars and policy making, generals and policy makers fight the last war, not the war of the future. The decision by the Fed to react to persistent deflationary pressures in the decade before August 2020 by moving its goalpost in a dovish direction likely contributed to its very slow reaction to what was the largest inflationary shock since the 1970s. In addition to the two explicit goals of inflation and employment, the Fed also targets financial stability, both inside and outside the banking system, which justifies adding measures like equity performance or certain money market signals to the rule. However, in practice, the authors have not found a Taylor rule specification that lends itself to strategies with high out-of-sample Sharpe ratios. This is illustrated, for example, by a 2022 paper by former St. Louis Fed President Bullard, where his stable of Taylor rules would have given poor signals in 2018 and then again in 2021 and 2022 (see Bullard, 2022). In our day-to-day work, we are therefore more focused on Fed speeches or data releases rather than Taylor rules to get the start of the cycle roughly right. Another way to get a sense of when to start positioning for hikes is to use market signals. In particular, we observe how quickly the market has priced hikes in previous cycles after the Fed appears to be done with an easing cycle. The exercise is complicated because the Fed can pause for a relatively long time after a cut, only to eventually continue with its easing cycle. The record for the longest such pause was held for a long time by the 2002 cycle (11 months) but was more recently bested as the Fed remained on hold for 12 months between 2024 and 2025. Table 5.5 shows what the market was pricing at the time when the Fed was either done, or paused for at least six months (using perfect foresight). At the time of that last cut, the market was already pricing hikes one year out, in 7 out of 11 cases, with the median coming in at 50bp. Six months later, the median hike had risen to 66bp, with only two episodes, where the market was still pricing a small cut one year out. Furthermore, the market is not overly good at distinguishing between final cuts and long pauses. All three episodes where the market was still pricing cuts on the day of the cut in question were episodes where the final cut was in, while three of the four episodes where more cuts were still to come were pricing meaningful hikes, with 2024 being the exception. For the market, being on hold for six months is usually just the same as being done. For our purposes, that means that if we expect the Fed to be on hold for at least six months, we should pay into the last cut. However, it is important to remember that the period between the last cut and the first hike is quite long, coming in at eight months in the median case (and 14 months in the average case). This means that rate hikes priced for one year after the last cut are, on average, exaggerated. The period between the last cut and the first hike is more of a traders’ market, and more medium-term positioning for the hiking cycle should only commence when a hike is expected in the next three months.